+++
author = "Anthony Rozmajzl"
date = 2019-07-08T20:28:00Z
description = ""
draft = false
slug = "for-those-crying-equal-pay-after-the-u-s-womens-team-2019-world-cup-victory"
title = "For those crying \"equal pay!\" after the U.S women's team 2019 World Cup victory"

+++


Yes, despite the U.S women's team winning another World Cup&ndash;a truly exceptional feat, no dobut&ndash;the players deserve to be paid less than their male counterparts. As hard as this may be to stomach, simply shouting "equal pay!" is an easy, knee-jerk reaction that makes no serious attempt to understand why there might be a pay disparity in the first place. Moreover, I am genuinely curious as to where this fiery equal pay mentality has been for the WNBA, CWHL, NPF, and NWHL. Don't you care about the pay disparities for all female athletes, regardless of how popular their leagues are? Also, if you're an equal-payer and had to Google any of those acronyms because you had no idea what they stood for, consider yourself a fair-weather anti-sexist.

What this controversy boils down to is the fact that you can't make people care more about women's soccer than they do men's soccer. Sorry, it's just not going to happen. Men's soccer is inherently more competitive: the athletes are stronger, faster, and more agile, all of which make men's soccer exceptionally more attractive to spectators. Too few would admit these facts, but deep down everyone knows it's true. This isn't to say that the women on the U.S. national soccer team aren't exceptional athletes in their own right, only that they can't measure up to their male counterparts in terms of the physical competitiveness they bring to the sport.

It is precisely because of this disparity in competition that the men's World Cup generates so much more revenue than the women's World Cup. The 2018 Men's World Cup in Russia generated more than [$6 billion](https://www.forbes.com/sites/mikeozanian/2019/03/07/world-cup-soccer-pay-disparity-between-men-and-women-is-justified/#152c5e386da4) of revenue and paid $400 million to participating teams, while the women's World Cup, according to a [piece](https://www.forbes.com/sites/prishe/2019/07/07/fifa-earns-a-red-card-for-poor-event-management-at-the-2019-womens-world-cup/#470f5da13d6d) by Patrick Rishe, is expected to generate $131 million of revenue across the 2019-2022 World Cup cycle and pay $30 million to participating teams. According to these numbers, one men's World Cup generates roughly 46 times more revenue than two women's World Cups! Now, even if we all agreed that the men's team and women's team *should* be paid the same, the money wouldn't exist to accomplish that goal. It would require literal magic to suddenly make people care enough about the women's World Cup to the point that it generated $6 billion in revenue. Until then, the equal pay conversation is ridiculous.

Citing the economic evidence for the gap in pay between the men's and women's team will almost certainly land you the response, "Well U.S. women's soccer games generate more revenue than U.S. men's games!" According to an [article](https://www.cnbc.com/2019/06/19/us-womens-soccer-games-now-generate-more-revenue-than-mens.html) by Abigail Hess at CNBC, from 2016 to 2018, "women’s games generated approximately $50.8 million in revenue, compared with $49.9 million for men’s games." While $900,000 is a relatively small distinction, it remains true that women's U.S. soccer games generate more revenue than men's U.S soccer games&ndash;well, at least in terms of ticket revenue. Ticket sales are just one source of revenue for U.S. soccer teams. TV deals and merchandise sales&ndash;two sources of revenue where men's U.S. soccer clearly dominates women's U.S. soccer&ndash;are left out of this revenue calculation. To include these numbers would, to no surprise, catapult U.S. men's soccer revenue far above U.S. women's soccer revenue. 

Remember, dear equal pay activists, that the motto is not simply "Equal pay!", but "Equal pay for equal work!" This is a philosophy to which everyone can agree. If the U.S. women's national team were able to defeat even the lowest ranking men's national team, then your "Equal pay!" chants would be a little more meaningful. But until that happens, and until women can compete at the same level as men (which will never happen), don't expect the pay gap to magically disappear.

