# INTRO

A few years ago, the gender wage gap was a popular, and often heated, topic of discussion. Back then, proponents of the idea that the gender wage gap was the result of an oppressive patriarchy actually made their case, often publicly, against intellectuals with whom they disagreed. Through rigorous discussions, lively debates, uncensored article posts, and [fiery interviews](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aMcjxSThD54), it became clear that the gender wage gap was the result of the voluntary and decisions made by men and women rather than 

Dismantling the approved Covid-19 narrative&mdash;mask madnates and lockdowns&;mdash appears to be a more formidable challenge. Propagators of the approved Covid-19 narrative enjoy the benefit of having their voices uncensored and echoed across all major news outlets and social media platforms, essentially shielded from the burden of proof that naturally arises from the introduction and continued support of novel virus mitigation strategies that have no scientific or historical precedent. The result is a seemingly unalterable, white hot cultural divide between those who approve of the official Covid-19 narrative and those who see mask mandates and lockdowns as ineffective and, in the case of lockdowns, disproportionately deadly strategies.here have been no debates between intellectuals on both sides of the issue. 

Now, despite numbers that are currently worse than the first half of 2020, governors are suddenly pushing for the reopening of their economies and easing restrictions on gathering sizes. In particular, New Jersey governor Phil Murphy [recently tweeted](https://twitter.com/GovMurphy/status/1356998994006794243?s=20) that on Feburary 5, gyms and restaurants can increase capacity to 35% while indoor performance venues and indoor gatherings for activities such as weddings or political events can host up to 150 people. This announcement comes at a time when New Jersey has [higher](https://covidtracking.com/data/state/new-jersey) case counts, deaths, and hospitalizations than it did during the entire stretch from June to October, where more severe restrictions were in place. Responses to Murphy's tweet, as with other governors' announcements of plans to ease restrictions, are generally negative and indicative of a covid-panicked population that prefers to remain under their safety blanket of social regulations. 


## Florida Is the State To Watch
- reference old article and how more data is needed
- before presenting the graph, explain the restrictions with other graph from hold2llc
- Hold2LLC graph comparing FL to NY and CA regarding hospitalizations and deaths/M
