I hate to be the bearer of bad news, Ben Shapiro, but the past 18 months have shown beyond a shadow of a doubt that feelings trump facts when it comes to covid-19. This is thanks entirely to the love triangle forged between the corporate press, state officials, and tech giants whose sinister campaign of fear and censorship spawned a reaction so virulent that society was upended in a matter of weeks for a virus with a 99.7% survival rate. (Get source on official survival rate)

In no time whatsoever, sacrificing for and preserving “public health”—costs be damned—became the chief end of mankind. Relegating oneself to a life of submission to state-imposed lockdowns and mask mandates became the greatest and most charitable calling one could fulfill (at least until the vaccine arrived). Did any Governor or president ever suggest that maybe “the people” ought to have a vote—as is, ostensibly, their sacred right under democracy—to determine whether or not every aspect of their social life be subject to manipulation on a daily basis? Of course not. In times of state-declared emergencies, when people’s most fundamental human rights are on the line, we quickly find that “our democracy” and “our sacred right to vote” were never anything more than convenient little tropes we learned in our third-grade social studies classes. Don’t believe me? What has this past year and a half entailed other than all of us sitting around just hoping that some important government person—typically your governor—drums up some public health policy that you happen to approve of? It takes an incredible amount of naivety, especially with history as our guide, to believe that society’s continued overhaul has anything to do with our safety and nothing to do with the state’s natural inclination to increased power.

In response to the famous imperative, “Ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country,” millions have found, perhaps for the first time in their lives, a purpose greater than themselves through which they have acquired a sense of worth and meaning: “For my fellow man I will stay home; I will obey the doctors and government officials that appear on my TV; I will adorn my face mask at all times to protect others; I will continue to adorn my face mask when nobody is near me, lest I am labeled an enemy of the noble mission bestowed upon me by the state; I will inoculate myself for the good of humanity because I truly care about human life. Through these I become a better citizen, I become a better person, and I am safe.”

In this response are found two lamentable traits of the average person: (1) The trained instinct—learned primarily in government schools—to revere and defer to those in positions of government authority and (2) the desire for safety over liberty. These traits have enabled a series of effortless goalpost shifts: from “It’s only two weeks” to “It’s just until hospitalizations are down” to “It’s just until cases are down” to “Its just proof of a negative test” to “It’s just until the vaccine arrives” to “It’s just until a certain percentage of the population is vaccinated” to “Your vaccination papers, please.” Each power grab was instinctively accepted as nothing more than our noble authorities working to ensure our safety. How could you be against that?

Simply put, those who continue to bleat in anticipation of smaller, more “protective” pens have yet to understand the big picture covid data which put this past year and a half into perspective, more specifically the data which show zero meaningful correlation between ANY government intervention and health outcomes. The same hysteria that took hold in the spring of 2020 has returned and it is as every bit unfounded
