+++
author = "Anthony Rozmajzl"
date = 2019-02-20T23:19:16Z
description = ""
draft = true
slug = "the-worst-argument-against-a-stateless-society"
title = "\"We need the state because human beings are garbage!\""

+++


If you're a libertarian, odds are you've heard this argument, or at least a similar one--which I will call the statist's claim--from statists making their case against libertarianism. As a point of clarification, when I use the word "statist" I am referring to anyone who believes the state is necessary, to any extent and for whatever reason, for society to function properly. Christian statists who make the above claim will often use words such as "fallen" or "sinful" instead of "garbage"; secular statists usually prefer to describe human beings as "corrupt" or "violent." And while it's true that no man can escape his capacity for sin and violence, the statist argues that this capacity alone is sufficient justification for the state. Without a centralized authority, their argument goes, man's capacity for violence and corruption is most realized and will send society spiraling into dystopian anarchy. 

There are two methods one can use in repsonding to this centuries-old, Hobbesean-style platitude, the first of which is to made abundantly clear that no libertarian expects a stateless society to rid man of his capacity for evil and violence. Everybody, pro-state and libertarian, accepts the perpetuity of violence and corruption across all societies. The libertarian's primary concerns are twofold: First, is the state or the free market, given man's capacities for sin and violence, more effective in mitigating crime and protecting property rights. Second, does the structure of the state or the structure of the free market promote greater exploitation of one man over the other. These two concerns lead to one question, and that is whether the state or the free market is a greater conduit for increased human corruption and sinfulness. Addressing the problem with a question like this shows that the statist is not so much concerned about man's propensity for violence and evil, but with the free market's effectiveness--as opposed to the state's effectiveness--in providing any good or service on a scale large enough to deter violent individuals and secure property rights. Ironically enough, the statist's claim puts a burden of proof on the statist himself who must show why it would be better for the state, as opposed to the free market, to provide certain goods and services to the public. 

A large number of statists today are convinced that coping with man's capacity for violence and corruption is a problem uniquely challening for libertarianism; this conviction rests on the assumption that the market is incapable of, or at least severely limited in, providing the goods and services traditionally handled by the state. It is the job of the libertarian to show why the free market would not only be more effective at providing any good or service that the state currently provides, but why it is more moral to provide these things through market mechanisms. 

The Statist's Claim should be immediately disregarded by libertarians as their unique burden of proof. Use the claim against the statist and your conversation will continue on equal footing.

The second method of response to the Statist's Claim is a bit more entertaining. The libertarian gets to play devil's advocate with the statist, but he objects to the statist's position with questions you could expect to hear from a third grader. What the libertarian should do is assume, as the statist does, that people are garbage, sinful, violent, corrupt, etc., and proceed to ask questions about our system of government in light of this assumption. To illustrate how humorous this method can be, assume you're having a conversation with a statist named Chad and Chad decides to make the following claim: 

"Libertarianism sounds great in theory, but it would never work in practice. People are garbage! They're too evil and corrupt to be left without a government. Even if small private societies did exist, they would just be in constant conflict with one another! At the end of the day, civil society is more secure with a state." 

Chad the Statist feels great at this point and is confident that he has you backed into a corner. Chad has watched all of *The Purge* movies and is well aware of what happens when the government shuts down completely. At this point you should ask Chad how he feels about voting (just bare with me). Most statist, even those opposed to a majority of the state's actions, will uphold its legitimacy by referencing the people's right to vote. Chad the Statist would say that voting is so crucial because it's the process by which the voice of the people is made known and proper change can occur. Try responding to Chad in the following way:

"Chad, you believe that the right to vote is abosultely pivotal in making sure that the will of the people is carried out, right?" At this point Chad may sense what you're up to, so just have him hear you and you can proceed as follows: "If people are truly garbage, sinful, etc., then why should they be trusted to elect other people into office? And aren't the elected officials garbage as well? Doesn't it seem far more dangerouse and king of ridiculous to admire having sinful collectives of garbage elect sinful pieces of garbage into office to rule over constituencies of sinful garbage? Why is it prefereable to put political and economic power into the hands of sinful garbage at all? As sinful garbage, won't they just use that power for ill? Wouldn't it be safer if these corrupt, evil human beings had no control over us?"

There are a lot of questions bundled up here, but they all drive home the following point: If people are so corrupt and so evil and violent, why on Earth would it be good to have a system of government that allows them to elect officials to represent and speak for them? If people are as evil and violent as the statist claims, then what is it about the elected official that makes him fit to rule his constituency? There really is no logically consistent way for the statist to answer these questions. Even with all the rationalization and logical gymnastics, the statist cannot justify the existence of the state having argued from the Statist's Claim. No matter how many corrupt individuals make their way into office, the statist will cry out that the current system has just got to be better than whatever those crazy libertarians can think of. I'd be content if the conversation ended there.

