+++
author = "Anthony Rozmajzl"
date = 2020-05-27T07:32:47Z
description = ""
draft = false
slug = "privatize-the-police"
title = "The time has come to privatize the police"

+++


In a matter of hours the entire nation was made aware of the gruesome and undeniably wrongful death of George Floyd, a 46 year old man who was [suffocated](https://twitter.com/QasimRashid/status/1265389213714915333) to death for [using a forged $20 bill](https://www.thecut.com/2020/05/man-pinned-down-by-minneapolis-police-officer-dies.html)[^1] at Cup Foods, a small grocery store in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

This tragedy has unequivocally refocused national attention on the problem of police brutality, a well-known feature of the current police system.[^2] Social media is laced with dozens, if not hundreds of videos capturing horrific abuses of power in the wake of protests catalyzed by Floyd's death. I am not talking so much about the aggressive and unconvenctional law enforcment measures taken against belligerent rioters and aggressive thieves, but those taken against peaceful protestors and non-violent citizens for crimes like [voicing discontent](https://twitter.com/sweeeetdee_/status/1267319103167107072?s=20) with local law enforcement or [filming police from your private property](https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/06/02/george-floyd-protest-minneapolis-cops-shoot-paint-people-porch/3123781001/). These are only two of the many instances of badge abuse that have occurred in just the past couple of weeks. Far more disturbing, however, is The Free Thought Project's collection of [more than 600 *pages*](https://thefreethoughtproject.com/category/cop-watch/) of incidents in which police officers are caught grossly abusing their power. 

This is hardly to say there are no good or honest police officers. But thanks to the [abundance of laws](https://mises.org/wire/too-many-laws-why-police-encounters-escalate) that mark many non-violent persons as criminals, good police officers, and many bad ones, are unnecessarily thrust into dangerous situations where excessive force and abuses of power are likely to manifest. This host of criminal offenses, mingled with an overwhelming rap sheet[^3] of badge abuse and an utter lack of decent economic incentives, make it such that the chances of a deadly or abusive encounter with a police officer are far more likely than a deadly or abusive encounter with a private security guard.

In light of nationwide protesting that has been directed towards [state institutions](https://www.cleveland.com/crime/2020/05/protesters-gather-in-columbus-over-death-of-george-floyd.html), [national monuments and memorials](https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2020/jun/1/lincoln-memorial-wwii-memorial-defaced-vandals-rio/), and [police departments](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/protests-looting-erupt-again-minneapolis-area-following-death-george-floyd-n1216881), it is time that our nation look to the marketplace--filled with some of the most brilliant and innovative entrepreneurship--to resolve the problems stemming from the state's coercively funded monopoly on police provision.

## Problem #1: The police have no duty to protect you

The first serious issue with government police is that they are [under no legal obligation to protect you](https://mises.org/power-market/police-have-no-duty-protect-you-federal-court-affirms-yet-again), according to Supreme Court cases *DeShaney vs. Winnebago* and *Town of Castle Rock vs. Gonzales*. 

Much of the looting and rioting in Minneapolis has gone unchecked simply because the police are not around to subdue it, leaving citizens to fend for themselves as their businesses are all but burned to the ground. And in only a matter of days, a frighteningly [extensive](https://bringmethenews.com/minnesota-news/a-list-of-the-buildings-damaged-looted-in-minneapolis-riots) number of buildings have been freely pillaged by Minneapolis rioters.

How can it be that the men and women whose job it is to protect our communities, defend our property, and stop criminal activity can simply walk away and cease to provide the services for which we are all forced to pay, especially when these services are most needed? Who else can Minneapolis store owners call when their state-sponsored law enforcement fails to show up? 

In no area of the market economy would consumers excuse such a blatant denial of products or services for which they had paid. Imagine being refused the keys to a vehicle you just purchased solely because the car dealership claimed they had no obligation to hand you the keys to the car you've just purchased. Would you not sue this dealership, publicize their horrible business practices, and immediately take your patronage elsewhere?

## Problem #2: No competition allowed

This brings us to the second major problem with the state-funded police: the prohibition of competing police forces. 

Competition gives rise to the abundance of different products and services available to us. It encourages innovation, cost-cutting, day-to-day efficiency, and friendly customer service. Business that do a better job of implementing these things are going to satisfy a greater number of consumers and be rewarded with larger revenue and increased profits. The moment consumers become dissatisfied with a business for any reason, they file complaints, leave negative reviews, request refunds and returns, or take their money elsewhere. As a business owner or entrepreneur, refusing to correct any inefficiencies in your business, ignoring customer feedback, or ceasing to innovate is an open invitation for another business or entrepreneur to take your place. Because markets operate in this manner, they present us with a tremendous overflow of choices that allow us to seamlessly switch between products and services to appease our ever-changing preferences. 

But rather than subjecting state-funded police to the same mechanisms that make market economies so competitive and flowing with choice--freedom of entry, the profit and loss mechanism, competitive innovation, and the desire to reduce business costs--there is no question that a majority of our nation would rather it be the sacrosanct duty of the state alone to provide us with policing services. And why should that be? Policing services are no more unique than any other service, nor is their provision too complicated for the world's most technologically advanced and innovative private sector[^4] Is it truly better to a have a one-size-fits-all, forcibly funded monopoly on police provision instead of tens, hundreds, or thousands of voluntarily funded, private police firms that are actually beholdent to their customers and tied to the profit and loss system of the marketplace?

Aren't businesses, apartment complexes, neighborhoods, and other key stakeholders in a community's well-being strongly incentivised to provide policing services so that consumers can safely patronize businesses and individuals can feel safe living in their apartments and neighborhoods? And is there any objection to the obvious fact that the incentive for community stakeholders to offer policing services would be met with an equal demand for security on behalf of individual consumers, property owners, and business owners, none of whom desire to live in unsafe neighborhoods or conduct businesse in dangerous communities? As long as consumer demand exists for safety and protection, which it always will, the best course of action is to allow free market entrepreneurship direct the resources necessary to meet those demands.[^5]

### Insurance companies acting as private protection and law enforcement

Advocates of privatized policing services will often point to insurance agencies, and rightly so, as another key stakeholder in a community's well-being. From the riot-induced theft and property damage in Minnesota alone, insurance companies can expect to be on the hook for at *least* [$25 million in claims](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/the-insurance-bill-for-damage-and-looting-during-protests-over-george-floyds-death-will-be-at-least-25-million-and-thats-just-in-minnesota-2020-06-04). Property Claims Services, an insurance agency devoted to monitoring "catastrophes", says the riots have resulted in a ["riot and civil disorder event"](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/the-insurance-bill-for-damage-and-looting-during-protests-over-george-floyds-death-will-be-at-least-25-million-and-thats-just-in-minnesota-2020-06-04) across multiple states.

There can be no objection to the obvious fact that business insurers--on top of life, health, dental, and auto insurers--have plenty of skin in the game when it comes to mass property damage and theft; no insurance provider wants to pay out claims, and after having witnessed the utter failure of state-funded police to perform their most basic duties, insurance providers may have all the incentive they need to start offering their own private protection and law enforcement.

Aside from the state's monopoly on police provision, nothing stands in the way of a market solution pioneered by insurance companies that allows individudals and businesses to purchase seucrity insurance policies for property protection and defense against criminal behavior. Is it hard to imagine that such a system would be so different from how we subscribe to, and seamlessly switch between, auto-insurance providers and different levels of coverage tailored to our specific needs? In terms of commercial and residential property protection and defense against criminal activity, businesses in remote areas may find it beneficial to purchase an individual security policy for the protection of only that business's premises. In more crowded locations it may be more beneficial for businesses and/or apartment complexes located within a particular city block, street, or district to pool their funding and purchase a group security policy to ensure there is criminal and property protection for covering a wider area. When it comes to residential protection, members of homeowners associations (HOAs) can, and do, pay monthly dues for [private HOA security teams](http://bravothree.com/homeowners-association-security/) to ensure that their residential areas are properly patrolled for criminal activity and that residents adhere to the laws and regulations of the HOA to which they voluntarily subscribe. Why would insurance companies be any less capable of expanding similar, already-existing private services to commercial areas?

It would take volumes to account for what law enforcement could potentially look like in the private sector [^6]. That is one of the heavy burdens libertarians face when they are met with objections from people who have only ever known the current system. And I imagine that libertarians would face the same onslaught of objections if they were to suggest privatizing the production and distribution of food, clothing, toiletries, shoes, etc. if we lived in a society where the state had traditionally been the sole provider of these things. We should be willing, at the very least, to allow private law enforcement agencies to grow alongside and compete against state-funded law enforcement, leaving the choice up to consumers as to which institution is most preferable.

### What laws should be enforced?

Even if we reach the point where law enforcement is wholly privatized, don't we still have to address how these private law enforcement firms would enforce the [60,000+](https://www.mercatus.org/publications/healthcare/health-regdata-quantifying-volume-healthcare-regulations) existing federal laws? It would seem that privatizing security only changes the enforcement mechanism, not the laws to be enforced. 

This is an honest objection, but it completely ignores the fact that privatizing law enforcement, by definition, means that each private law enforcement business gets to pick and choose which laws they enforce. The types of laws enforced, and how well those laws are enforced, would be subject to constant monitoring and scrutiny by individual consumers and businesses, both of whom have the immediate option of taking their patronage to another private law enforcement agency should they become dissastified with the types of laws their current agency enforces or how those laws are executed. 

Private law enforcement agencies that choke civilians to the ground for spitting gum on private property are probably not going to last very long. Likewise, private security agenices that refuse to enforce the most basic and morally detestable criminal offenses--rape, robbery, murder, property damage, fraud, arosn, etc.--are going to be hard-pressed to find any patrons. In the end, consumers will patronize private law enforcement agencies that properly enforce good laws while refusing to enforce the slew of petty laws that mark non-violent persons as criminals, such as [18 USC §545 & 19 CFR §134.23](https://twitter.com/CrimeADay/status/1269075745579642880); they will seek out and reward those agencies which are most skilled in peacful dispute resolution, de-escalation, and justifiable uses of force. 

Very important is the fact that private security agencies would be forever subject to the demands of their consumers and to the profit and loss mechanism of the market. This latter reality makes it much easier for consumers to peacefully dismantle corrupt or failing institituions because consumers are able to freely move their dollars out of failing organizations into successful ones. It would take but one publicized instance of misconduct or brutality in the private sector to financially sink a private security agency. This is not at all the case with state-funded police.

## Problem #3: Political Moral Hazard

Moral hazard is introduced when individuals are incentivised to engage in questionable behavior without fear of suffering the  potential consequences of said behavior. 

The doctrine of [qualified immunity](https://www.cato.org/blog/why-qualified-immunity) is quite possibly the biggest contributer to moral hazard in the policing community. Simply put, qualified immunity allows police officers--and other state officials--to avoid accountability for undeniably illegal and grossly immoral practices so long as their very specific circumstances and practices haven't been strictly ruled on in a prior court proceeding. Clark Neily [describes](https://www.cato.org/blog/officer-involved-killing-george-floyd) how this doctrine could be used to have George Floyd's case quickly tossed out of court:

>if Mr. Floyd’s family wants to sue the officer who took his life, they will need to find an existing case from the Eighth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals holding that a police officer may not kneel on a unresisting suspect’s neck, ignoring his pleas for help, until he passes out. If no such case happens to be on the books, their case will be summarily tossed out of court. Such is the perversity of the Supreme Court’s qualified immunity doctrine.

Without a specific prior ruling on the exact circumstances and brutal methods of law enforcement, the doctrine of qualified immunity can be used to excuse a seemingly endless number of grossly immoral and over-aggressive policing behaviors. What private policing service could expect to gain any customers when right up their sleeve is the ability to dismiss any claims brought against their employees for abuses of power?

## Problem #4: Economic Moral Hazard

In addition to qualified immunity, all government-run businesses and government-granted monopolies, including police departments, face the moral hazard of being severed from the profit and loss mechanisms of the market.

The very simple metrics of profit and loss determine how successful business are in meeting the needs of consumers. Private enterprises that waste resources, drive away customers with poor service, or refuse to tailor their products and services to meet consumer demand will quickly find themselves losing revenue as consumers decide to patronize the more profitable, i.e. successful, businesses.

Police departments, being financially secured through taxation and, as a last resort, the printing press face no financial consequences for squandering resources, failing to cut costs, refusing to innovate, or wrongfully killing one of their constituents. This is because the continued operation of police departments is not contingent upon the voluntary patronage of its citizens. No amount of consumer dissatisfaction, resource waste, or business malpractice will lead to a loss of revenue that would force departments to rethink their allocation of resources or business practices.

## There was no reason for George Floyd to die

One can only wonder whether George Floyd would have died if his arrest had been carried out by a privatized police force that was held accountable to the profit and loss system, in constant competition with other agencies to provide the most just and peaceful means of dispute resolution, and unanointed with the doctrine of qualified immunity.

We live in the world's most technologically advanced and competitive economy. Normal human beings will always demand protection for themselves, their families, their property, and their businesses. In light of nationwide protesting and overwhelming dissatisfaction with state-funded police, now is the perfect time for the free market to assume the duty of policing our communities.

[^1] If we are going to be nabbing citizens for using counterfeit money, we might want to consider proportional fines for the Federal Reserve, an institution that has been counterfeiting to the tune of trillions for more than a century.

[^2]: The claim that brutality is a well-known feature of the police system is hardly irrefutable, as the term "police brutality" is the only one of its kind. Can you remember the last time you heard someone speak of "Walmart brutality," "Costco brutality," "Gamestop brutality," "Papa Johns brutality," and so on?

[^3]: I would challenge any proponent of state-funded police to find a single surviving private company whose number of instances of physical abuse and intimidation of their customers rival those of state-funded police. 

[^4]: Most people simply lack the imagination to even entertain the notion of privatized police. They will use their inability to conceive of what a privately funded policing business might look as evidence for the impracticality of private policing. Murray Rothbard offered a number of solutions in his 1979 manifesto [*For a New Liberty*](https://mises.org/library/new-liberty-libertarian-manifesto), written in an era far less technologically advanced than we live in today.

[^5]: The arguments one would use against a single payer healthcare system are ironically abandoned during discussions of privatizing our single payer law enforcement system.

[^6]: For those interested in learning more about the private provision of policing services, or what society would look like without the state, consider the following resources as an excellent starting point: [*To Serve and Protect*](https://www.independent.org/store/book.asp?id=21) by Bruce Benson, [*Chaos Theory*](https://mises.org/library/chaos-theory) by Bob Murphy, ["Police Choice: Feasible Policy Options for a Safer and Freer Society"](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3194200), and [*For a New Liberty*](https://mises.org/library/new-liberty-libertarian-manifesto) by Murray Rothbard
